>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 6:
GETTING OUT THE VOTE IN THE
FINAL 48 HOURS OF THE
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN AS F.B.I.
DIRECTOR JAMES COMEY AGAIN
WEIGHS IN ON HILLARY CLINTON'S
EMAILS.
WHAT SHOULD YOU WATCH FOR ON
ELECTION NIGHT?
JEFF GREENFIELD HAS AN HOUR BY
HOUR GUIDE.
AND, COULD THE POPULAR VOTE EVER
REPLACE THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE?
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>> FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WITH ONLY TWO DAYS LEFT IN THE
RACE FOR THE WHITE HOUSE, THE
F.B.I. IS CLEARING HILLARY
CLINTON IN ITS RENEWED PROBE OF
THE PRIVATE EMAIL SERVER SHE
USED WHILE SERVING AS PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S SECRETARY OF STATE.
IN A NEW LETTER SENT TO MEMBERS
OF CONGRESS THIS AFTERNOON,
F.B.I. DIRECTOR JAMES COMEY
SAYS: "BASED ON OUR REVIEW, WE
HAVE NOT CHANGED OUR CONCLUSIONS
THAT WE EXPRESSED IN JULY WITH
RESPECT TO SECRETARY CLINTON."
IT WAS IN JULY THAT COMEY
ANNOUNCED THERE WOULD BE NO
CRIMINAL CHARGES BROUGHT AGAINST
HILLARY CLINTON FOR HANDLING OF
CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS IN EMAILS
SENT OR RECEIVED ON THE PRIVATE
SERVER.
TEN DAYS AGO, COMEY REVEALED THE
F.B.I. HAD COME ACROSS A NEW
CACHE OF EMAILS ON A HOME
COMPUTER BELONGING TO CLINTON
AIDE HUMA ABEDIN AND HER
ESTRANGED HUSBAND,
EX-CONGRESSMAN ANTHONY WEINER,
WHO'S UNDER INVESTIGATION FOR
ALLEGEDLY SEXTING A MINOR.
IN TODAY'S NEW LETTER, COMEY
TELLS CONGRESS: "THE F.B.I.
INVESTIGATIVE TEAM HAS BEEN
WORKING AROUND THE CLOCK TO
PROCESS AND REVIEW A LARGE
VOLUME OF EMAILS FROM A DEVICE
OBTAINED IN CONNECTION WITH AN
UNRELATED CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATION.
DURING THAT PROCESS, WE REVIEWED
ALL OF THE COMMUNICATIONS THAT
WERE TO OR FROM HILLARY CLINTON
WHILE SHE WAS SECRETARY OF
STATE."
THEN, TO REPEAT, COMEY
RECOMMENDSAGAINSTBRINGING ANY
CHARGES AGAINST CLINTON.
EARLIER TODAY, CLINTON RALLIED
HER BASE IN THE CRITICAL STATE
OF PENNSYLVANIA, SPEAKING AT AN
AFRICAN-AMERICAN CHURCH IN
PHILADELPHIA.
>> THIS ELECTION IS ABOUT MUCH
MORE THAN THE TWO CANDIDATES.
OUR NAMES MAY BE ON THE BALLOT,
BUT MAKE NO MISTAKE, EVERYTHING
YOU CARE ABOUT, EVERYTHING I
CARE ABOUT AND I'VE WORKED FOR
IS AT STAKE.
>> Stewart: LAST NIGHT CLINTON
JOINED SINGER KATY PERRY ON
STAGE AT A CONCERT, ALSO IN
PHILADELPHIA, TO ENCOURAGE
MILLENNIAL VOTERS TO TURN OUT.
THIS EVENING, CLINTON VISITS NEW
HAMPSHIRE A FINAL TIME AND ENDS
HER CAMPAIGN TOMORROW WITH MORE
STOPS IN PENNSYLVANIA AND TRIPS
TO MICHIGAN AND NORTH CAROLINA.
DONALD TRUMP CAMPAIGNS IN FIVE
STATES TODAY -- STARTING IN
IOWA, WHICH GEORGE W-BUSH WON IN
2004, BUT MITT ROMNEY AND JOHN
McCAIN LOST.
LATER, TRUMP WAS SCHEDULED TO
VISIT MINNESOTA, MICHIGAN,
PENNSYLVANIA, AND VIRGINIA.
HE TOLD SUPPORTERS EARLIER
TODAY, HE'S "THE OUTSIDER."
>> IF SHE EVER GOT INTO THE OVAL
OFFICE, HILLARY AND HER SPECIAL
INTERESTS WOULD ROB OUR COUNTRY
BLIND-- THAT'S WHAT SHE'S BEEN
DOING.
>> Stewart: WE'RE GOING TO CHECK
IN ON BOTH CAMPAIGNS, AND WE
BEGIN IN CLEVELAND, OHIO, WHERE
THE "NEWSHOUR'S" JOHN YANG IS
FOLLOWING THE CLINTON CAMPAIGN.
AND, JOHN, I UNDERSTAND THE
CLINTON CAMPAIGN HAS RESPONDED
TO F.B.I. DIRECTOR COMEY'S
LETTER.
>> THAT'S RIGHT, AS THEY FLEW
HERE FROM PHILADELPHIA, THE
COMMUNICATIONS DIRECTOR FOR THE
CAMPAIGN SPOKE TO REPORTERS.
SHE SAID WE HAVE SEEN DIRECTOR
COMEY'S LATEST LETTER TO THE
HILL.
WE'RE GLAD TO SEE THAT AS
WE-- GLAD TO SEE THAT HE HAS
FOUND, AS WE WERE CONFIDENT THAT
HE WOULD, THAT HE HAS CONFIRMED
THAT THE CONCLUSIONS THAT HE
REACHED IN JULY, AND WE'RE GLAD
THAT THIS MAT CERTIFICATE
RESOLVED.
WE'RE TOLD THAT THE FBI WENT
THROUGH THE EMAILS THAT THEY
FOUND ON ANTHONY WEINER'S LAP
DOP FOUND THAT MOST OF THE
EMAILS WERE DUPLICATE OF EMAILS
THAT HUMA ABEDIN, WEINER'S
ESTRANGED WIFE HAD ALREADY
TURNED OVER TO THE F.B.I.
THIS STORY REALLY THROUGH THE
CAMPAIGN FOR A LOOP WHEN IT
BROKE ABOUT A WEEK AGO AND NOW
THEY ARE VERY HAPPY THAT IT'S
BEEN RESOLVED.
>> JOHN, LET'S TALK ABOUT THE
GROUND GAME FOR 9 NEXT 48 HOURS.
WHAT CAN WE EXPECT?
>> SHE'S HERE IN OHIO FOR THE
SECOND TIME IF THREE DAYS.
SHE'S GOING TO BE IN
PENNSYLVANIA TOMORROW FOR TWO
MORE VISITS TO MAKE THAT THREE
STOPS IN THAT STATE OVER THE
PAST SEVERAL DAYS.
WHAT THEY'RE TRYING TO DO HERE
IN OHIO, THE POLL CAME OUT THIS
MORNING SHOWING IT A VIRTUAL
TIE.
CLINTON AHEAD BY ONE PERCENTAGE
POINT.
THEY'RE TRYING TO GAIN GROUND IN
THIS SWING STATE.
THIS STATE THAT NO REPUBLICAN
HAS EVER GOTTEN TO THE WHITE
HOUSE WITHOUT FIRST WINNING THIS
STATE.
PENNSYLVANIA IS A STATE THAT
THEY ARE SELF CONFIDENT ALL
ALONG BUT IT SEEMS THEY'RE
TRYING TO NAIL IT DOWN, PROTECT
WHAT THEY ALL THEIR FORTRESS IN
PENNSYLVANIA, TRYING TO KEEP IT
DEMOCRATIC, KEEP IT FROM
FLIPPING TO THE REPUBLICAN PARTY
FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE 1988.
>> JOHN YANG REPORTING FROM
CLEVELAND, OHIO, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS, ALISON.
>> AND THE NEWSHOUR'S JEFF BROWN
IS COVERING THE TRUMP CAMPAIGN.
HE JOINS ME NOW FROM SIOUX CITY,
IOWA, WHERE TRUMP IS EXPECTED
TO WIN, JEFF.
>> HI, ALISON I'M IN THE
CONVENTION CENTER IN SIOUX
CITY, WHERE A RALLY FINISHED UP.
YOU CAN HEAR THE R08ING STONES
PLAYING BEHIND ME AND A FEW
PEOPLE STILL LEFT HERE.
THE PLACE HOLDS ABOUT 3,000
PEOPLE, WE WERE TOLD, AND WAS
FILLED TO CAPACITY AND THERE ARE
MANY THOUSANDS BEYOND OUTSIDE.
IT WAS KIND OF A STANDARD SPEECH
AT THIS POINT, TO THE CORE, TO
THE BASE.
AND THIS IS EXACTLY WHERE A
DOT-- A LOT OF THE TRUMP CASE
IS.
THIS HAS BEEN PART OF THE PEOPLE
WHO HAVE BEEN SUPPORTING HIM
FROM THE BEGINNING.
HE JOKED WHEN HE GOT HERE THAT
HE HAD BEEN TOLD THAT HE DIDN'T
EVEN REALLY HAVE TO COME HERE
TODAY.
BUT HE SAID, OF COURSE, I WANTED
TO COME HERE BECAUSE I WANT TO
BE WITH THE PEOPLE IN IOWA.
AND OF COURSE THE REASON WHY
THEY FEEL SO OPTIMISTIC IS
BECAUSE OF THIS POLL THAT CAME
OUT LAST NIGHT THAT SHOWED TRUMP
UP SEVEN PERCENTAGE POINTS HERE
IN IOWA AND I THINK THAT
TOOK EVERYBODY BY A BIT OF
SURPRISE.
>> LET'S LOOK AT THE PAST 20
YEARS IN IOWA.
IF YOU GO BACK FROM 1996, THE
WINNERS WERE CLINTON, GORE,
BUSH, OBAMA, OBAMA.
SO WHAT HAS CHANGED IN THE LAST
FOUR YEARS THAT IOWA SEEMS
POISED TO GIVE ITS SECRETARIES
ELECTORAL VOTES TO THE
REPUBLICAN CANDIDATE?
>> WELL, IT'S TRUE.
THIS IS A STATE THAT HAS GONE
MOSTLY FOR DEMOCRATIC
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES BUT I
THINK WHAT HAS HAPPENED IS YOU
HAVE SEEN IOWA GENERALLY MOVING
MORE RED.
YOU SEE THAT IN THE STATE HOUSE,
THE STATE SENATE WHICH MAY GO
REPUBLICAN THIS CAMPAIGN.
YOU SEE IT IN THE TWO SENATE
SEATS WHICH ARE BOTH REPUBLICAN.
AND NOW IT LOOKS AS THOUGH IOWA
IS GOING FULLY RED FOR THIS
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN.
>> JEFF BROWN FROM SIOUX CITY,
IOWA, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME, ALISON.
>> Stewart: IN THE PAST SIX
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS, 18
STATES VOTED FOR THE DEMOCRAT IN
THE CONTEST.
THOSE STATES DELIVERED 242 OF
THE 270 ELECTORAL VOTES NEEDED
TO WIN THE WHITE HOUSE.
THAT RECENT HISTORY SHOULD GIVE
HILLARY CLINTON AN ADVANTAGE,
BUT THIS CAMPAIGN HAS BEEN VERY
UNPREDICTABLE.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT JEFF GREENFIELD IS
HERE TO HELP US MAKE SENSE OF
THINGS.
JEFF?
>> Reporter: THANKS, ALISON. ON
TUESDAY NIGHT, WATCHING THE
ELECTION RETURNS COME IN, WHAT
SHOULD YOU LOOK FOR, HOUR BY
HOUR, AS THE POLLS CLOSE FROM
EAST TO WEST?
WE'RE GOING TO TAKE YOU THROUGH
THE NIGHT AS IT MIGHT UNFOLD,
BUT ONE KEY CAUTION: POLLS
CLOSING DON'T NECESSARILY MEAN
WE'LL KNOW WHO WON; THAT CAN
TAKE MUCH MORE TIME.
>> Reporter: AT 7 P.M., WE'RE
USING EASTERN STANDARD TIME
THROUGHOUT, POLLS CLOSE IN SIX
STATES.
INDIANA-- WHERE RUNNING MATE
MIKE PENCE IS GOVERNOR-- WILL
ALMOST SURELY GO FOR DONALD
TRUMP.
BUT INDIANA COULD TELL US
SOMETHING IMPORTANT ABOUT LATER
STATES AS SEAN TRENDE, SENIOR
ELECTION ANALYST FOR REAL CLEAR
POLITICS, NOTES.
>> THAT'S A STATE THAT MITT
ROMNEY WON BY ELEVEN POINTS IN
2012.
SO IF DONALD TRUMP IS OVER THAT,
IF HE'S UP AROUND 15%, 16%,
MAYBE EVEN APPROACHING GEORGE W.
BUSH'S 20% WIN FROM 2004, THEN
WE'LL KNOW WE'VE GOT A RACE ON
OUR HANDS.
>> Reporter: INDIANA IS ALSO THE
SITE OF ONE OF THE KEY U.S.
SENATE RACES: DEMOCRATS NEED TO
GAIN FIVE SENATE SEATS TO TAKE
CONTROL THERE, AND WHEN EX-
SENATOR EVAN BAYH DECIDED TO RUN
FOR HIS OLD SEAT, IT LOOKED LIKE
A SURE DEMOCRATIC GAIN.
BUT HIS POST-SENATE CAREER AS A
LOBBYIST HAS BROUGHT HIM INTO A
DEAD HEAT WITH REPUBLICAN
CONGRESSMAN TODD YOUNG.
>> IF HE'S LOSING, OR IF IT'S
TIED, IT WOULD SUGGEST REAL
PROBLEMS FOR DEMOCRATIC SENATE
PROSPECTS.
>> Reporter: IN VIRGINIA,
CLINTON'S BEEN WELL AHEAD IN THE
POLLS, AND HER RUNNING MATE,
SENATOR TIM KAINE, IS FROM
THERE, AND OBAMA WON IT TWICE.
IF VIRGINIA IS CLOSE, THAT'S A
SIGN OF REAL TROUBLE FOR
CLINTON.
BY CONTRAST, IF CLINTON IS CLOSE
IN GEORGIA, THAT'LL BE A SIGN
THAT HER BASE-- AFRICAN-
AMERICANS AND COLLEGE-EDUCATED
WHITES-- HAVE TURNED OUT TO
VOTE.
AT 7:30, POLLS CLOSE IN THREE
STATES-TWO OF THEM ESPECIALLY
CRITICAL FOR TRUMP.
IT'S ENDLESSLY SAID THAT NO
REPUBLICAN HAS EVER WON THE
WHITE HOUSE WITHOUT OHIO, AND
THIS YEAR ITS LARGE WHITE
WORKING CLASS POPULATION SEEMS
TO BE LEANING STRONGLY TO TRUMP;
HE'S LEADING IN THE POLLS. BUT
SEAN TRENDE SAYS, WATCH THE
MARGINS.
>> IF DONALD TRUMP IS WINNING
OHIO BY 4,5, EVEN 6 POINTS, THEN
AGAIN WE KNOW WE HAVE A PRETTY
GOOD SUSPICION THAT NOT ONLY IS
HE DOING WHAT HE NEEDS TO DO,
HE'S DOING A LITTLE BIT BETTER,
AND WE ARE PROBABLY LOOKING FOR
SOME SURPRISES AS THE LATER
STATES CLOSE.
>> Reporter: NORTH CAROLINA'S
BEEN A BATTLEGROUND IN RECENT
YEARS.
OBAMA WON IT BY A POINT IN 2008,
LOST IT BY TWO POINTS IN 2012.
IF CLINTON WINS HERE, IT'S VERY
HARD TO CHART A PATH TO THE
WHITE HOUSE FOR TRUMP.
NORTH CAROLINA IS ALSO THE SITE
OF ANOTHER KEY SENATE RACE: TWO-
TERM REPUBLICAN RICHARD BURR IS
IN AN UNEXPECTEDLY CLOSE RACE
AGAINST DEMOCRATIC FORMER STATE
LEGISLATOR DEBORAH ROSS.
8 P.M. BRINGS A FLOOD POLL
CLOSINGS-- 16 STATES PLUS
WASHINGTON, D.C.
YOU MAY REMEMBER ONE OF THEM,
FLORIDA, PLAYED A STARRING ROLE
BACK IN 2000 AS WE WAITED A
MONTH TO FIND OUT WHO'D BE
PRESIDENT.
THIS TIME, IT'S A STATE THAT
CLINTON DOES NOT NEED, BUT IF
SHE WERE TO WIN THOSE 29
ELECTORAL VOTES, SHE'D BE
VIRTUALLY ASSURED VICTORY.
PENNSYLVANIA, ON THE OTHER HAND,
IS A STATE CLINTON VERY MUCH
DOES NEED.
FOR THE LAST SIX ELECTIONS,
PENNSYLVANIA HAS BEEN FOR
REPUBLICANS WHAT LUCY'S FOOTBALL
IS TO CHARLIE BROWN-- ALWAYS OUT
OF REACH.
>> EVERYBODY IN PENNSYLVANIA
WANTS TRUMP, YOU KNOW.
>> Reporter: WINNING IT FOR
TRUMP WOULD DRIVE A BIG HOLE
THROUGH THE "BLUE WALL" OF
SOLIDLY DEMOCRATIC STATES.
>> IF TRUMP WERE TO WIN
PENNSYLVANIA, IT WOULD SUGGEST
THAT HE PROBABLY IS GOING TO WIN
A BUNCH OF OTHER STATES THAT
HAVE SIMILAR OR EVEN LESS
FAVORABLE DEMOGRAPHICS FOR THE
DEMOCRATS, LIKE WISCONSIN AND
MICHIGAN.
>> Reporter: PENNSYLVANIA ALSO
HAS ONE OF THOSE CRITICAL SENATE
BATTLES, BETWEEN REPUBLICAN
INCUMBENT PAT TOOMEY AND
DEMOCRATIC FORMER STATE OFFICIAL
KATIE MCGINTY.
WITH SOME $113 MILLION SPENT, IT
IS THE MOST EXPENSIVE SENATE
CONTEST IN THE COUNTRY.
TRUMP IS A MAJOR FACTOR IN THIS
CONTEST WITH TOOMEY KEEPING HIS
DISTANCE AND MCGINTY TRYING TO
TIE HIM TO TRUMP.
BESIDES BEING A PRESIDENTIAL
BATTLEGROUND TOO, NEW HAMPSHIRE
HAS A KEY SENATE RACE.
FIRST-TERM SENATOR KELLY AYOTTE,
IS RUNNING FOR RE-ELECTION
AGAINST DEMOCRATIC GOVERNOR
MAGGIE HASSAN; ANOTHER KEY RACE
WHERE POLLS SAY IT'S JUST ABOUT
EVEN.
AND, SURPRISINGLY, IN MISSOURI,
REPUBLICAN SENATOR ROY BLUNT,
MEMBER OF THE STATE'S MOST
POWERFUL REPUBLICAN FAMILY, IS
IN A TOUGH BATTLE AGAINST
DEMOCRATIC SECRETARY OF STATE
JASON KANDER, WHO VAULTED INTO
PROMINENCE WITH THE SINGLE MOST
TALKED ABOUT AD OF THE ENTIRE
YEAR.
>> IN THE ARMY, I LEARNED HOW
TO USE AND RESPECT MY RIFLE.
I ALSO BELIEVE IN BACKGROUND
CHECKS, SO THE TERRORISTS CAN'T
GET THEIR HANDS ON ONE OF THESE.
I APPROVE THIS MESSAGE BECAUSE
I'D LIKE TO SEE SENATOR BLUNT
DO THIS.
>> BLUNT IS AN ESTABLISHMENT GUY
RUNNING IN AN ANTI-ESTABLISHMENT
YEAR.
>> Reporter: AT 9:00 P.M., POLLS
CLOSE IN 13 MORE STATES.
MICHIGAN AND WISCONSIN, TWO
STATES THAT ARE PART OF THAT
DEMOCRATIC "FIREWALL," HAVE BEEN
SPECIAL TRUMP TARGETS.
>> RIGHT NOW, THE POLLS ARE
SHOWING HILLARY CLINTON PRETTY
CONSISTENTLY IN THE LEAD.
BUT AGAIN, IF TRUMP IS
OVERPERFORMING THE POLLS, THOSE
STATES BECOME VERY DICEY,
ESPECIALLY WISCONSIN.
>> Reporter: IT'S A DIFFERENT
DEMOGRAPHIC SHIFT IN STATES LIKE
COLORADO AND ARIZONA.
INCREASING LATINO TURNOUT HELPED
TURN COLORADO BLUE FOR OBAMA
TWICE; CLINTON IS COUNTING ON IT
TO STAY BLUE.
AND SHE'S INVESTED TIME AND
MONEY IN ARIZONA, A STATE THAT'S
VOTED DEMOCRATIC FOR PRESIDENT
ONCE IN THE LAST 64 YEARS.
A WIN FOR HER COULD MAKE UP FOR
ANY LOSS IN ONE OF THOSE
INDUSTRIAL MIDWEST STATES.
DEMOCRATS WILL BE WATCHING THE
WISCONSIN SENATE RACE VERY
CLOSELY.
THEY'RE COUNTING ON EX-SENATOR
RUSS FEINGOLD TO WIN BACK THE
SEAT HE LOST TO REPUBLICAN RON
JOHNSON SIX YEARS AGO, BUT THAT
RACE HAS LATELY TURNED VERY
TIGHT.
ONCE THE 9 P.M. STATES ARE
CALLED, WE MAY ALSO START TO SEE
WHAT THE NEW HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES WILL LOOK LIKE.
THERE ARE HOUSE REPUBLICANS IN
SERIOUS TROUBLE IN NEW YORK, NEW
JERSEY, FLORIDA, AND ILLINOIS,
AMONG OTHERS PLACES.
DEMOCRATS NEED TO NET 30 SEATS
TO TAKE CONTROL-- AN UNLIKELY
PROSPECT-- BUT WE'LL START TO
KNOW THIS HOUR WHETHER THE GOP
IS SUFFERING MINOR, MAJOR, OR NO
LOSSES IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.
AT 10 O'CLOCK, POLLS CLOSE IN
FOUR STATES, TWO OF THEM"
BATTLEGROUNDS."
DEMOCRATS HAVE WON IOWA FIVE OF
THE LAST SIX TIMES, BUT THIS
STATE HAS BEEN TRENDING TRUMP'S
WAY.
AND BOTH CAMPAIGNS HAVE TARGETED
NEVADA, WHERE EARLY VOTING, AND
A GROWING LATINO POPULATION, MAY
FAVOR CLINTON.
NEVADA'S THE ONE STATE WHERE A
DEMOCRATIC SENATE SEAT IS IN
DANGER.
WITH DEMOCRATIC LEADER HARRY
REID RETIRING, REPUBLICAN
CONGRESSMAN JOE HECK IS RUNNING
AGAINST THE STATE'S DEMOCRATIC
FORMER ATTORNEY GENERAL,
CATHERINE CORTEZ-MASTO.
11 P.M., SIX STATES CLOSE, AND
THIS IS WHAT WE CAN SAY FOR
SURE: WITH CALIFORNIA, OREGON,
WASHINGTON STATE AND HAWAII,
THERE ARE 78 ELECTORAL VOTES
THAT ARE CERTAIN FOR CLINTON.
TRUMP CAN COUNT ON THE SEVEN
ELECTORAL VOTES FROM IDAHO AND
NORTH DAKOTA.
BUT WILL THOSE 78 ELECTORAL
VOTES BE ENOUGH TO PUT CLINTON
OVER THE TOP?
THAT DEPENDS ON WHAT THE VOTE
COUNT TELLS US IN THOSE EARLIER
EASTERN AND MIDWESTERN STATES.
>> Reporter: GIVEN THE HIGHLY
UNUSUAL NATURE OF THIS CAMPAIGN,
IT'S POSSIBLE WE COULD WITNESS
AN EQUALLY UNUSUAL ELECTION
NIGHT: LIKE ONE WHERE ALASKA'S
THREE ELECTORAL VOTES DECIDE THE
PRESIDENCY, OR WHERE IT ENDS IN
A 269-269 TIE, THROWING THE RACE
INTO THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.
ALISON?
>> JEFF, WHICH SENATE RACES ARE
YOU GOING TO BE WATCHING.
>> THERE ARE A COUPLE THAT
CHANGED CONTOURS IN THE LAST
COUPLE OF WEEKS.
IN WISCONSIN THE ASSUMPTION IS
THAT EX-SENATOR RUSS FINE GOLD
WAS GOING TO EASILY DEFEAT
INCUMBENT RON JOHN-- JOHNSON,
THAT RACE LOOKS CLOSE.
AND IN NORTH CAROLINA INCUMBENT
RICHARD BURR SEEMS TO RUN INTO
HEAD WATERS AND I WILL BE
WATCHING BOTH OF THOSE CLOSELY
TO SEE WHETHER OR NOT THE SENATE
FLIPS WITH FOUR OR FIVE
DEMOCRATIC VICTORIES TO
DEMOCRATIC CONTROL.
>> JEFF GREENFIELD, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> ELECTION DAY 2016, THE
HISTORIC END TO A LONG CAMPAIGN.
WHO WILL VOTERS ELECT AS THE
NEXT PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES?
WHICH PARTY WILL CONTROL
CONGRESS?
WHAT ELSE WILL WE LEARN FROM THE
VOTERS?
JOIN PBS NEWSHOUR FOR SPECIAL
ELECTION NIGHT COVERAGE.
ANALYSIS YOU WON'T FIND ANYWHERE
ELSE.
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 8, STARTING
AT 8:00, 7:00 CENTRAL ONLY ON
PBS.
>> Stewart: THE FOCUS ON
BATTLEGROUND STATES LIES IN
THE VALUE THOSE STATES HOLD IN
THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE WIN THEM,
AND A CANDIDATE CLOSES IN ON THE
270 ELECTORAL VOTES NEEDED TO
BECOME PRESIDENT.
THE PROCESS MAKES MANY VOTERS IN
RELIABLY REPUBLICAN OR
DEMOCRATIC STATES FEEL LEFT OUT.
WHAT IF THE CAMPAIGNS COMPETED
FOR EVERY VOTE, EVERYWHERE?
ONE IDEA TO GET THERE IS TO MAKE
THE NATIONAL POPULAR VOTE DECIDE
THE ELECTION.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S HARI
SREENIVASAN HAS MORE.
>> I THINK THE STATE OF
PENNSYLVANIA WE'RE GOING TO WIN
SO BIG.
>> WOW, IT IS GREAT TO BE BACK
HERE IN RALEIGH.
>> Reporter: SINCE THEIR
NOMINATING CONVENTIONS IN JULY,
DONALD TRUMP AND HILLARY CLINTON
HAVE MADE MORE THAN 90% OF THEIR
CAMPAIGN STOPS IN JUST 11 SO-
CALLED BATTLEGROUND STATES.
OF THOSE VISITS, NEARLY TWO-
THIRDS TOOK PLACE IN THE FOUR
BATTLEGROUNDS WITH THE MOST
ELECTORAL VOTES-- FLORIDA,
PENNSYLVANIA, OHIO, AND NORTH
CAROLINA.
THAT'S BECAUSE VOTERS DON'T
DIRECTLY ELECT THE PRESIDENT THE
ELECTORAL COLLEGE DOES.
A SYSTEM ENSHRINED IN THE
CONSTITUTION, EACH STATE HAS A
SHARE OF THE 538 ELECTORS
ROUGHLY PROPORTIONAL TO ITS
POPULATION: GENERALLY, WHOEVER
WINS A STATE GETS ALL THE
ELECTORS.
BUT FOUR TIMES IN U.S. HISTORY,
INCLUDING IN THE BUSH-GORE RACE
IN 2000, THE WINNER OF THE
NATIONWIDE POPULAR VOTE HAS LOST
THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE, AND THE
ELECTION.
EVEN WITHOUT THOSE ANOMALIES,
THE CURRENT SYSTEM RANKLES
RESIDENTS OF STATES NOT ANOINTED
AS "BATTLEGROUNDS" AND LARGELY
PASSED OVER BY THE CANDIDATES,
BECAUSE THE STATES ARE PERCEIVED
TO BE SO SAFELY IN ONE PARTY'S
COLUMN.
>> THE IDEA THAT A HANDFUL OF
STATES IS WHERE THE ELECTION IS
TAKING PLACE, WHILE THE VAST
MAJORITY OF STATES ARE
BYSTANDERS IS CRAZY.
WHAT OTHER DEMOCRACY DOES IT
THAT WAY?
>> Reporter: JEFFREY DINOWITZ IS
A DEMOCRATIC STATE ASSEMBLYMAN
REPRESENTING PART OF THE BRONX
IN NEW YORK CITY.
HE HAS CHAMPIONED LEGISLATION TO
CHANGE HOW WE ELECT PRESIDENTS.
IT'S CALLED "THE NATIONAL
POPULAR VOTE INTERSTATE
COMPACT," AND IT WOULD ALLOCATE
PARTICIPATING STATE'S ELECTORAL
VOTES TO WHOMEVER WINS THE
NATIONAL POPULAR VOTE.
FOR EXAMPLE, IF DONALD TRUMP
WERE TO WIN THE MOST VOTES
NATIONALLY, NEW YORK AND EVERY
OTHER STATE IN THE COMPACT,
WOULD PLEDGE ITS ELECTORS TO
HIM, EVEN IF HE DIDN'T WIN THOSE
STATES.
SO, THE PACT LEAVES THE
ELECTORAL COLLEGE IN PLACE, NO
CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT
REQUIRED, BUT ESSENTIALLY
CIRCUMVENTS IT AND CREATES A
DIRECT NATIONAL POPULAR VOTE FOR
THE PRESIDENCY.
>> WE WANT THE ISSUES OF OUR
STATE AND OUR COMMUNITIES TO
COUNT AS MUCH AS THE ISSUES IN
OTHER STATES LIKE FLORIDA.
>> Reporter: NEW YORK
OVERWHELMINGLY ADOPTED THE
LEGISLATION IN 2014 WITH
BIPARTISAN SUPPORT, JOINING NINE
OTHER STATES AND WASHINGTON D.C.
ALL SOLIDLY DEMOCRATIC.
TOGETHER, THEY HAVE 165
ELECTORAL VOTES.
BUT BY DESIGN THE COMPACT WON'T
HAVE AN EFFECT UNTIL IT'S JOINED
BY STATES BEARING A TOTAL OF
270, THE MAJORITY NEEDED TO
ELECT A PRESIDENT.
>> THE PROBLEM IS, THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT SOUNDS GREAT,
IT'S WELL INTENTIONED, BUT THERE
ARE ALL SORTS OF UNFORESEEN
CONSEQUENCES THAT I DON'T THINK
HAVE REALLY BEEN THOUGHT
THROUGH.
>> Reporter: DEMOCRATIC STATE
SENATOR MICHAEL GIANARIS
REPRESENTS PART OF QUEENS IN NEW
YORK CITY AND OPPOSES THE
NATIONAL POPULAR VOTE COMPACT.
HE SAYS THE COMPACT
FUNDAMENTALLY CHANGES A
CONSTITUTIONAL PROCESS AND WOULD
DISADVANTAGE SMALL STATES--
SOMETHING THE FOUNDING FATHERS
TRIED TO AVOID IN THE
CONSTITUTION.
>> IF YOU COME TO A SYSTEM
THAT'S PURELY BASED ON POPULAR
VOTE, ALL YOU'RE GOING TO SEE IS
MONEY BEING SPENT IN THE BIG
MEDIA MARKETS BECAUSE THAT'S
WHERE THE DENSITY IS.
SOME OF THESE BIGGER POPULATIONS
WOULD THEN DRIVE THE ATTENTION
TO THE EXCLUSION OF THE REST OF
THE COUNTRY, AND I DON'T THINK
THAT WOULD BE GOOD EITHER.
>> Reporter: GIANARIS ALSO
BELIEVES A NATIONAL POPULAR VOTE
COULD LEAVE OUT MANY AMERICANS,
SINCE THE NUMBER OF ELECTORS
EACH STATE HAS IS BASED ON ITS
NUMBER OF MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.
AND THAT'S BASED ON POPULATION,
NOT ELIGIBLE VOTERS.
>> THE STATE'S ELECTORAL COLLEGE
NUMBER INCLUDES, FOR EXAMPLE,
CHILDREN, IT INCLUDES
INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS, IT
INCLUDES NON CITIZENS, BUT WHO
ARE HERE LEGALLY.
THOSE PEOPLE GENERALLY CAN'T
VOTE IN MOST INSTANCES, BUT THEY
ARE REPRESENTED WHEN DETERMINING
HOW MANY ELECTORS A STATE HAS.
BUT WHEN YOU'RE DETERMINING
PURELY BASED ON WHO IS TURNING
OUT TO VOTE ON ELECTION DAY YOU
LOSE THAT BIT OF REPRESENTATION.
>> Reporter: WHILE ONLY SAFE
DEMOCRATIC STATES HAVE JOINED
THE COMPACT, IRONICALLY, THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY SEEMS TO HAVE A
STRUCTURAL ADVANTAGE IN
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS UNDER THE
CURRENT SYSTEM.
>> AS LONG AS CALIFORNIA AND NEW
YORK ARE NOT COMPETITIVE, AND
YOU THROW IN A FEW OTHER BIG
STATES, THE DEMOCRATS START OFF
WITH A BIG LEAD.
>> Reporter: JOSHUA TUCKER IS A
PROFESSOR OF POLITICS AT NEW
YORK UNIVERSITY AND SAYS THAT IF
A RELIABLY REPUBLICAN STATE LIKE
TEXAS, WITH THE SECOND MOST
ELECTORAL VOTES, TURNED
DEMOCRATIC, THE WHITE HOUSE
WOULD BECOME OUT-OF-REACH FOR
THE REPUBLICANS, AND THEN THEY
MIGHT BE OPEN TO THE NATIONAL
POPULAR VOTE COMPACT.
>> IF YOU WANT TO GO TO A NAKED
POLITICAL CALCULATION, IF
POLITICIANS WANT TO WIN
ELECTIONS, IF POLITICAL PARTIES
WANT TO GET THEIR CANDIDATES
ELECTED PRESIDENT, THEY'RE GOING
TO THINK ABOUT WHAT SORT OF
ELECTORAL SYSTEM IS GOING TO
ALLOW THEM TO BETTER BE ABLE TO
DO THIS.
NORMALLY, BECAUSE THIS IS IN THE
CONSTITUTION, NOT STATUTORY,
WE'RE LOCKED INTO THIS ELECTORAL
SYSTEM, THE INTERSTATE COMPACT
HAS GIVEN A WAY TO POSSIBLY GET
AROUND THAT.
>> Reporter: NEW YORK
CONSERVATIVE PARTY CHAIRMAN MIKE
LONG CAME AROUND TO THE IDEA OF
THE NATIONAL POPULAR VOTE
COMPACT AFTER HIS OWN FAMILY
SAID THEIR VOTES FOR MITT ROMNEY
DIDN'T MATTER IN THE 2012
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
>> ONE OF MY OWN SONS LOOKED IN
MY EYES AND SAID, "DAD, IT
DOESN'T MAKE ANY DIFFERENCE.
ROMNEY'S NOT GOING TO WIN NEW
YORK."
I WAS DEFTLY CONVINCED I WAS ON
THE RIGHT SIDE OF NATIONAL
POPULAR VOTE THEN, BECAUSE I
BELIEVE IT'S IMPORTANT THAT
EVERYONE VOTES.
>> Reporter: LONG BELIEVES THAT
OTHER CONSERVATIVES WILL
EVENTUALLY SUPPORT THIS
APPROACH, BECAUSE THERE ARE
REPUBLICANS ALL OVER THE COUNTRY
WHO FEEL THEIR VOTES DON'T
MATTER.
>> I THINK THERE'S AN AWFUL LOT
OF PEOPLE FEEL THEY'RE
DISENFRANCHISED, THAT THEIR VOTE
DOESN'T MAKE ANY DIFFERENCE.
IF YOU LIVE IN CHICAGO AND YOU
HAPPEN TO BE, IF YOU HAPPEN TO
BE A CONSERVATIVE REPUBLICAN,
YOU FEEL THAT, IN ILLINOIS, I
DON'T HAVE A CHANCE TO TURN THIS
AROUND.
IF YOU'RE A DEMOCRAT IN
OKLAHOMA, YOU PROBABLY DON'T
COME OUT TO VOTE BECAUSE YOU
DON'T HAVE A SHOT TO CARRY THE
STATE FOR YOUR FAVORITE
CANDIDATE, WHOEVER THAT MAY BE.
>> ONCE YOU GET ENOUGH STATES TO
PASS THIS LAW, THEN IT DOESN'T
MATTER WHAT THE OTHER STATES ARE
DOING.
>> Reporter: PROFESSOR TUCKER
SEES ONE WAY THAT MOMENTUM IN
SUPPORT OF THE NATIONAL POPULAR
VOTE PACT COULD GROW AFTER THIS
YEAR'S ELECTION.
>> IF TRUMP WINS THE ELECTION,
THERE IS A SMALL BUT NON-TRIVIAL
CHANCE THAT HE WOULD WIN THE
ELECTION WITHOUT HAVING RECEIVED
A MAJORITY OF THE POPULAR VOTE.
WITHOUT EVEN SEEING A PLURALITY,
IF HE WAS ELECTED WHERE HE WON
THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE BUT LOST
THE POPULAR VOTE, I THINK IT
WOULD GIVE A STRONG IMPETUS TO
THIS MOVE TO NATIONAL POPULAR
VOTE.
>> Reporter: STILL, EVEN A
COMPACT BETWEEN STATES TOTALING
270 ELECTORAL VOTES WOULD LIKELY
BE CHALLENGED IN THE COURTS,
INCLUDING WHETHER IT A COMPACT
LIKE THIS IS ENFORCEABLE.
BUT ASSEMBLYMAN JEFFREY DINOWITZ
IS OPTIMISTIC THAT A NATIONAL
POPULAR VOTE CAN BECOME A
REALITY.
>> I THINK OVER TIME, MORE AND
MORE PEOPLE ARE COMING AROUND TO
THE POINT OF VIEW THAT THIS
SHOULD HAPPEN.
SO THERE STILL IS A WAYS TO GO.
BUT I THINK THAT THE MORE PEOPLE
LOOK AT THIS, THE MORE SUPPORT
IT GETS.
IT'S NOT A PARTISAN ISSUE.
IT'S JUST NOT.
>> WHY DOES THE UNITED STATES
RANK NEAR THE BOTTOM IN VOTER
TURNOUT AMONG DEVELOPED NATIONS?
FIND OUT AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
FINALLY SOME 50,000 RUNNERS
STARTED THE ANNUAL NEW YORK CITY
MARATHON TODAY AND 20-YEAR-OLD
GHIRMAY OF ERITREA BECAME THE
YOUNGEST MAN EVER TO WIN.
FOR THE WOMEN, KENYAN MARY
KEITANY WON FOR HER THIRD
IN A ROW.
AMERICANS PLACED THIRD IN BOTH
RACES.
TOMORROW, HOW THE CLINTON AND
TRUMP CAMPAIGNS ARE GETTING OUT
THEIR VOTES IN BATTLEGROUND
STATES.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART, GOOD NIGHT.